---
layout: lesson
title: Syllabus
purpose: get an introduction and orientation to the course
format: syllabus
date: 2021-09-14 09:30
---

## Welcome to Open Source Geographic Information Science!
[Middlebury College](http://www.middlebury.edu) [Geography](http://www.middlebury.edu/academics/geog) [Course](http://www.middlebury.edu/academics/geog/courses) [GEOG0323](https://catalog.middlebury.edu/courses/view/catalog/catalog%2FMCUG/course/course%2FGEOG0323)

## Contact and Availability

- Email: josephh@middlebury.edu
- Office: McCardell Bicentennial Hall 6th Floor: room 634 or GIS lab
- Availability: Tues / Wed 11am&ndash;12:30pm
- Lecture: TR 9:30&ndash;10:45 in BiHall 438
- Lab: R 1:30&ndash;4:15 in BiHall 632

For assistance outside of office hours, your resources include:
1. The course [issues](https://github.com/GIS4DEV/GIS4DEV.github.io/issues)
2. Classmates
3. Documentation, Issues, Forums, or Support/FAQs for the data or software we are using
4. [Stack Exchange](https://gis.stackexchange.com/) or similar
5. Post a new issue on the specific repository we are working on or a general [course issue](https://github.com/GIS4DEV/GIS4DEV.github.io/issues).
6. *Only private/confidential concerns should be sent to email*

## Course Description

In this course we will study geographic information science (GIS) with open-source software and critical GIS scholarship.
In labs, we will practice techniques to include: data acquisition and preparation for analysis, spatial SQL database queries, automating analysis, spatial interpolation, testing sensitivity to error and uncertainty, and data visualization.
We will read and apply critical research of GIS as a subject and with GIS as a methodology.
Spatial data sources for labs and independent research projects may include remote sensing, micro-data, smart cities and open government data, and volunteered geographic information (e.g. OpenStreetMap and social media).

Prerequisite: GEOG0120 *Human Geography with GIS* or approval based on other experience in geographic analysis.
Programming experience is *not assumed or required*!
You just need to be willing to learn how to translate the spatial analysis that you know from desktop GIS (QGIS, ArcGIS, etc.) into code.

The major emphasis this fall will be learning how to **manage a full GIScience research workflow** in an **open science framework**. We’ll achieve this through:
- a series of **workshops**, of which roughly half will be training in using SQL, Python, or R to do spatial analysis, and half will be reproducing research publications published with data and executable code
- four more **in-depth labs**, in which you’ll craft your own spatial analysis or expand upon an existing study in a significant way (e.g. by testing the methods in a new study area or testing alternative methodological approaches)
- **readings** and **debates** about research practices in GIScience

## Learning Goals

-	Survey [FOSS4G](https://foss4g.org/) (Free and Open Source for Geospatial) in terms of its landscape of organizations and projects, research applications, and (radically) unique political economy of knowledge production.
-	Expand your functional knowledge of the nature of geographic information with respect to data standards, structures, metadata, provenance, error, and uncertainty.
-	Creatively apply Open GIScience to address compelling questions in human geography and problems in social and environmental sustainability.
-	Critically reflect on emerging opportunities and ethical dilemmas in open-source geographic information science.
-	Learn how to reproduce existing geographic research and to produce geographic research that is open, reproducible and replicable.
-	Design and communicate research effectively in multiple media, including digital media, reports, presentations, maps, graphs, tables, data, and code.
-	Become competent and confident in conducting research, learning new methods, and overcoming errors, uncertainty, and technical difficulties.
Learn to "debug" problems and teach yourself new techniques through structured experimentation.

## Expectations

- **Inclusivity**: Consciously and actively include yourself and others in learning, participation, collaboration, and discussions.
Inclusivity may be achieved through [academic accomodations](https://www.middlebury.edu/office/disability-resource-center/accommodations-and-resources/academic-accommodations) and/or [student resources](https://www.middlebury.edu/office/teaching-learning-research/student-resources) for learning and research.
Accommodations and correspondence about them are confidential.
- **Academic Honesty**: Open source and open science have a different ethos about intellectual property and its value than most of us are accustomed to.
In the first two weeks of class, we will discuss and update our expectations for the [honor code and academic honesty](c-honorcode) in a course focused on open science.
- **Deadlines**: You must always commit the progress that you have made on assignments by the assignment deadline. In case unforeseen challenges or delays have prevented full completion of an assignment, you are required to record the progress that you have made, describe the barrier(s) encountered and anything you have learned about it/them, and propose a solution.
- **End of Semester**: Your body of work for the course must be complete on GitHub Pages by the end of finals week. [Incomplete grades](http://www.middlebury.edu/about/handbook/iv.-policies-for-the-institute/a.-academic-policies/a.6.-grades-credits-and-academic-policies/a.6.e.-incomplete-grades) can only be considered if extreme/unexpected circumstances arise in the final weeks of the semester and if the majority of assignments have already been satisfactorily completed.

## Student Work & Evaluation

Open science requires researchers, universities, and publishers to change the way they value intellectual work and intellectual property, and the same goes for instructors and students.
Traditional means of evaluating and grading student work that are based on individualism, competition, and secrecy are counterproductive to an open science learning environment.

Throughout this course you will develop a set of your own personal pages and repositories on GitHub, containing all of your work for the course. You will receive qualitative feedback on your GitHub portfolio work from peers and from your professor throughout the semester, and you will be given  opportunities to self-evaluate as well. My goal and expectation for your work is that through revision based on feedback, most students should develop a portfolio suitable to show potential employers or graduate schools, earning at least a B+ or A-. Your qualitative feedback throughout the semester serves as your roadmap to this level of achievement. I prefer for us to evaluate your portfolio in whole at the end of the semester for one final grade. However, if there are extenuating circumstances, I can also fall back on a more traditional weighted average of grades for each assignment. Qualities for your work are graded as follows:

Gr | Description
-- | --
A | Work is excellent, complete, and timely. Your work is ready to show to employers or graduate schools. In addition, you have contributed positively to the collective learning and knowledge base of the class.*
A- | Work is excellent, complete, and timely. Your work is ready to show to employers or graduate schools with *very* minor revisions.
B+ | High quality work. Your work is ready to show to parents and friends, and almost ready to show employers or graduate schools&mdash;pending minor revisions.
B | Good work. Your work needs a fair amount of revision to remedy errors and/or full effort to some more cursory components. You could use one more round of feedback and revision before sharing with employers.
B- | Decent work. There are a few significant errors and/or gaps that need addressing before you can share the work with a potential employer.
C's | You have demonstrated learning and intellectual growth, but important components of your GitHub portfolio are not working or in need of complete revisions. C+ needs at least one additional round of feedback prior to sharing work with a potential employer, whereas C or C- may need more.
D | Work is incomplete and/or cursory
F | Not attempted

*There's no public record of your contributions in chats, GroupMe, or similar communication channels. If you're using these, I suggest posting a summary in a GitHub Issue.

If for any reason we need a more traditional weighted grading arrangement, the weights shall be:
- `20%` Quality participation in blog posts, class discussions & debates, and so on
- `20%` 7 Workshop accomplishments illustrated in blogs or short reports
- `60%` 4 Major Labs with reports, of which one is an independent replication or reanalysis study weighted equally with the other three

Workshops
1. GitHub Pages
2. PostGIS Practice
3. Python Practice
4. Spatial Accessibility Reproduction
5. Malawi Climate Vulnerability Reproduction
6. Twitter Analysis Reproduction
7. COVID Disability Reproduction

Labs
1. PostGIS Urban Resilience Analysis & PostGIS Urban Resilience
2. Spatial Accessibility Replication
3. Twitter Analysis Replication
4. Independent project replication/reanalysis

## Approach to learning

- **Theory** and **context** in which open GIScience research is practiced
- **Introduction** workshop/tutorial to research tools/platforms
- **Study** the research paper and compendium of a GIScience research project
- **Reproduce** the project by acquiring the same data and executing the same procedures
- **Reanalyze** the project by adjusting and improving some components of the research design
- **Replicate** the project by applying it to a new context (thematic, geographic, or temporal)

## Materials & resources

There is no required textbook.

Digital materials will be provided on this site and in other repositories of the [GIS4DEV GitHub Organization](https://github.com/gis4dev), including a private repository for [literature](https://github.com/GIS4DEV/literature).

You must be willing to use a variety of free software and apply for/subscribe to a variety of free internet-based services, listed below.
We will not install or sign up for all of these programs/services at once, but please attempt to get each one running quickly as you are prompted throughout the semester, so that we have ample time to troubleshoot or find alternative solutions.
**Remember all of your passwords**

- [QGIS Version 3.10.14 LTR or newer](https://qgis.org/)
- [GitHub Account and Desktop Software](https://github.com/)
- [R](https://www.r-project.org/) and [RStudio](https://rstudio.com/)
- [Twitter Developer](https://developer.twitter.com/en/apply-for-access)
- [DHS Data](https://dhsprogram.com/)
- [CyberGISX](https://cybergisx.cigi.illinois.edu)
- [Hour of Cyberinfrastructure](https://www.hourofci.org/)

## General Expectations for GIScience Analyses

- Complete a research compendium (a GitHub repository) for each analysis. We'll have specific training on this.
- Write up a summary and interpretation of the analysis.
- Include methods documentation to support full reproducibility.
This is most easily achieved by having legible code with good comments.
- Visualize results with maps and/or graphs.
- Interpret results with support of references to class readings.

## Expectations for blog posts

In weeks in which no lab is due, please write a short blog post reflecting on new class content (readings, discussions, activities, workshops) connecting them to their significance for you, in terms of any internships, independent research, other courses, personal experience, or career aspirations you may have. You could also take a less personal perspective by connecting content to relevant current events and societal / environmental issues. The most straightforward approach to organizing a blog post is in response to any of the discussion prompts from that week. To facilitate class activities, some weeks will include more specific direction for the week's post.

The timing of this is flexible: you could reflect on readings prior to a class meeting about them, or extend the in-class discussions afterward. Post your thoughts by Tuesday of the following week.

Posts should include references to relevant readings by listing them at the end (similar to how I have done in this course site) and linking to their DOI, if one is available.
