---
layout: lesson
title: Reproducibility and Replicability in Geography
purpose: "debate whether GIS is a reproducible and replicable science"
---

In lecture, we will discuss and debate:
1. Whether GIS should be considered a science?
1. If/how open source GIS can help with the crisis of reproducibility and replicability in science?

We can debate this in the context of our recent GIS Analysis, related to this ESRI tool for [managing testing sites](https://www.esri.com/en-us/covid-19/response)

The debate will be informed by two readings:

1. Chapter 3, *Understanding reproducibility and replicability* (pages 31-43 ) of: <br>
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. *Reproducibility and Replicability in Science*. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. [DOI: 10.17226/25303](https://doi.org/10.17226/25303)
3. Sui, D., and P. Kedron. 2021. Reproducibility and Replicability in the Context of the Contested Identities of Geography. *Annals of the American Association of Geographers* 111 (5):1275–1283. DOI:[10.1080/24694452.2020.1806024](https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1806024).

In preparation for/response to the debate, please prepare a reflection/position statement on the two questions in the form of a blog-style post on your GitHub site.
Specifically, you might reflect on:
1. What problems of the reproducibility crisis does open source GIS help solve for geography? How?
1. In what ways does open source GIS not solve the reproducibility crisis in geography?




In preparation for/response to the debate, please prepare a reflection/position statement on the two questions in the form of a blog-style post on your GitHub site.
Specifically, you might reflect on:

- How can **open source GIS** contribute to solving problems of the **reproducibility crisis**?
