---
layout: lesson
title: Malawi Data
purpose: "investigate data for the study and revise preanalysis plan"
---

## Big Code

Serge Rey just gave a great talk at the AAG Annual Meeting on [Big Code](https://aag.secure-abstracts.com/AAG%20Annual%20Meeting%202021/sessions-gallery/27052) in which he referenced the importance of [code as text](02b_showmethecode.md), discussed issues of inclusivity and algorithmic bias in spatial analysis at length, and considered the potential for open source spatial analysis code to become a means for co-production of algorithmic knowledge with communities that have historically been excluded from the field (a very white male crowd).

## Prepare a Repository for the Reproduction Attempt

1. Prior to class, each group should have one complete workflow in a markdown `.md` text document.
1. `Fork` the `RP-Malcomb` repository. (Wait to do this until Wednesday LAB time!)
1. Share the repository amongst your group.
1. Have one person `clone` it to their computer.
1. Add your preanalysis plan markdown to the repository. 
1. `Commit` and `push` this change.
1. Create a new `release` of the repository online, titled `RP-Malcomb-Preanalysis-Plan` and note in the description that this preanalysis was formulated without accessing any data for the study.

## Investigate Data Sources

Now, it's time to investigate the data sources for the Malcomb et al (2014) study!

I suggest you divide up the task of investigating and describing the data sources and, based on what you find, revising the preanalysis plan. One way to slice it would be to use Table 2 to divide the task by:

- Assets
- Access
- Livelihood Sensitivity available [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1RKVGitv4HxFuCylYps-gGkt6OK4oAjJa/view?usp=sharing) for Middlebury students only.
- Physical Exposure

As each person finishes their section, join others with more complex data or rotate data sources. Make sure each data source gets a look by at least one person, and by the end, everyone should agree on the new preanalysis plan.

1. Make amendments to your preanalysis plan markdown document.
1. It should be possible for different group members to work simultaneously, as long as they work on different sections of the document.
1. When you are finished, create a second `release` titled `RP-Malcomb-Preanalysis-Plan-Data` and note in the description that this preanalysis plan was amended after investigating all data sources for the study, but prior to starting any analysis.